This episode is sponsored by
Datadog with 350 plus integrations,
as well as metrics logs,
traces, and APM Datadog enables
your team to quickly find
and fix issues before they
escalate. Visualize your microservices architecture
with a service map, spot
unusual trends with the log
patterns, view and monitor the
availability of your services with
synthetics. Start a free 14
day trial of Datadog today
and receive a complimentary t-shirt
by visiting bitly.com/data dog shirt.
That's bitly.com/datadog shirt, Hansel minutes.
And today I'm talking with
Lauren McPhail and wants to
get app. Hi, I'm doing
well. Thanks. How are you?
I'm doing pretty well and
I'm happy to be chatting
with you. So get app
is a gardener Company. We
are. So we like to
say that get up is
TripAdvisor for B to B
software. The idea is that
if you are a smaller
midsize business owner and you
need different software to run
your business, whether it's HR
or marketing or business intelligence
software, you would go to
get app.com. You would read
LinkedIn verified reviews of thousands
of different cloud SAS products
you would filter by the
features you need. And eventually
you would choose the tool
that is the best fit
for your business in the
context of your app stack,
Because I speak from ignorance.
So forgive me if these
are dumb questions, but I
read a lot of like
Gartner reports and like analyst
reports. And I wonder, what
is the skill set of
an analyst? I mean, you
have, you have to know
business, you have to know
technology. How do you keep
track of it all? And
what is your background? Yeah,
it's a great question. I
was a media studies major
in college, so I don't
have a computer science degree.
And I actually think that
my media studies education was
better preparation for my career
as a Gartner analyst, because
a lot of it is
doing large scale evaluation of
different technologies and really separating
hype from what's realistic for
business owners to be doing
now versus what they should
be doing even in five
years time, because you need
to advise them on when
to make the right investment
in those technologies. And oftentimes
for example, we as analysts
for small and midsize business
owners will tell them this
isn't the right time for
your small business to be
investing in blockchain. It's not
going to reach maturity for
five to 10 years. And
so you're better off investing
in this until then, or
we'll say to them, AI
is in this all encompassing
technology. It's actually integrated into
a lot of very popular
cloud SAS products that you
probably use every day, whether
it's Google drive or Slack.
And so this is how
you can start thinking about
using AI in a more
productive way. So a lot
of it is educating the
masses and really speaking to
your audience in terms of
their level of technical expertise.
Oftentimes our readers and software
buyers are people who are
pretty technically savvy, but they
just want to know more
about particular products. And that's
a separate issue audience from
someone else who needs the
tools, but really is starting
from scratch in terms of
their knowledge of the SAS
landscape. So you are truly
an analyst and you are
analyzing your ads. It's a
multi I'm trying to think
what the right word for
it. It's multiple disciplines to
be able to do, analyze
these things and to provide
a bridge between, like you
said, the regular person and
the technical person. That's true.
And I think the distinction
as well is that you
have to be up on
your game in terms of
technical expertise and understanding your
audience, but you also have
to be able to distill
technical concepts in a pretty
easy to digest way. I
was at a conference out
in San Jose last year
and overheard an attendee, say,
I know a lot about
blockchain and what it is.
I still really don't know
a lot about what it
actually does. So if I
had to distill my role
as an analyst into one
sentence, it would really be
to explain what these technologies
do on the business side.
And you do have a
master's degree, but you've also
done few followed up with
additional certificates. And anytime you
can take classes, I guess
you recently took a class
at MIT at the Sloan
school to kind of start
getting up to speed on,
on AI. This is an
area of interest. It is
I, I am most interested
in AI and I'm happy
to specialize in it. Last
year. I noticed that Sloan
was running courses on AI
for business strategy. And that's
actually a course that I
haven't really seen replicated in
many other places. Even if
you look at MBA programs
or other similar higher education
programs, you often find I
AI it, you know, lumped
within a larger computer science
education. And it's not that
that's a bad thing, but
in terms of the very
particular application of AI in
business contexts, there isn't a
lot out there besides the
MIT course that Sloan offered.
And I found it so
relevant to my work as
an analyst that I decided
to take it. And it
really has paid itself off
in spades in terms of
what I learned and my
ability to apply it to
my work. As an analyst.
I also went on to
coauthor, a research note for
Gartner enterprise clients on the
use of what we call
everyday AI in social software
applications like Slack and Google
drive, and everyday AI, as
something we define as AI
that is so subtle. You
don't even realize that it's
in the system and the
goal there was really to
emphasize to the readers that
you don't have to be
scared of AI. It's already
a part of tools that
you're very familiar with and
understanding the benefits that it
brings to your work will
help you make more informed
choices about integrating AI further
into your business. And one
of the things that you
were concerned about, and as
you have been exploring the
area of AI is this
idea of bias in AI.
And I've done a couple
of, of shows about that.
How does bias get baked
into AI if people are,
if people mean well, like
I don't want to bake
bias into my software, I
can afford it. That's a
great question, because I think
when we talk about bias
in AI, the end result
whether intentional or not is
that it comes off as
purposeful. And the reality is
that it's more often not
the case. It's more often
the case that bias, creeps
into the data sets used
to train machine learning algorithms
as indirect bias. And that
is when you have byproducts
of sensitive attributes that correlate
with nonsensitive attributes. So when
we're talking about a sensitive
attribute in the context of
bias, it's something that is
direct. So let's say you're
building a machine learning algorithm
that is going to give
home home loans to potential
housing buyers. You an example
of a sensitive attribute would
be race. And so an
example of direct bias would
be that you are specifically
excluding black people from the
dataset or you're exclusive, or
you're intentionally giving them lower
loans. That's an example of
direct bias. Indirect bias again
is an unintended correlation of
sensitive and nonsensitive attributes. And
so one example is that
you might have with, for
example, red lining, which is
a practice that was common
in Portland, Oregon for over
a hundred years, red lining
basically locked black people of
color out from buying homes
in certain areas of Portland.
And even though that was
declared illegal in 1990, we
still have over a century's
worth of data that was
predicated on practice. That's now
illegal. And so if you
were to use that data
in a dataset to train
an ML algorithm, you might
be indirectly reinforcing bias, even
though that's not your intent.
And I think it's, it's
interesting to point that out
that it can happen, even
though it is not your
intent, but it's a very
sensitive topic. So if someone,
then let's just say criticizes
and say, Hey, look, your,
your area. It has bias
and you go, Hey, I'm
not racist. I didn't mean
to do that. It's it's,
it's it creeps in there
whether you are explicitly doing
it or not. And it's
the awareness of that. That's
important. Definitely. So, and that's
the thing that I always
try to emphasize upfront when
I give talks on machine
in ML algorithms. I first
start by saying, we all
have bias as humans, whether
we acknowledge it or not.
I say to them, I
know less biased than you
are just because I'm up
here giving this talk. And
we, and again, it, the
data sets that are used
to train these ML algorithms
are so complex that there
really is no way to
take bias out of the
algorithm, but there are specific
things that you can do
from the outset of the
product's life cycle that will
mitigate it throughout and hopefully
keep you from retraining your
model from scratch. That's something
else I emphasize is the
concept that ethical debt in
this case bias is actually
technical debt. Because if you
find out down the line
that your algorithm is unacceptably
biased, your only recourse is
going to be to scrap
the model and completely retrain
it. And that creates an
enormous amount of work for
your team when you're already
working on a very complicated
problem. So if you work
to mitigate bias from the
start, when you're writing your
texts spec, you can eliminate
a lot of those issues
moving. How do we catch
all the things though? There's
always going to be an
exception, right? Like you and
your, you wrote an article
for opensource.com where you talked
about how, you know, not
everyone thinks about how their
models are going to be
used. And if you don't
consider all aspects of how
your, your model will be
used, you're going to find
yourself in a situation where
someone could potentially be in
life or death. And one
of the examples that you
gave was like a self
driving car or something that
takes voice commands. And like,
for example, my wife has
constantly frustrated with Alexa because
she has an accent and
it doesn't seem to understand
her like it does me.
So she'll actually ask me
to tell Alexa stuff. If
we were trying to tell
Alexa to stop doing something
dangerous or turn something off
that needed to be turned
off immediately, we could have
a real, a real problem.
I love that example that
you gave because it's something
that I use in my
talk on machine bias as
well. I specifically talk about
a woman named dr. Carol Riley,
who is a very renowned
AI expert. She's an entrepreneur.
She has a PhD in
the subject. And when she
was building a voice command
interface using Microsoft's speech recognition
API, she found that her
own creation couldn't recognize her
voice, presumably because the API
was not exposed to enough
voice variations in training. And
so then it couldn't recognize
accents, inflections, or even people
of different genders. And so
Carol wrote an op ed
for tech crunch, where she
talked about how she tried
lowering her voice and her
own creation. Couldn't still recognize
her voice. And the end
result was she actually had
to have a male graduate
student present her her own
work because it couldn't recognize
her voice. And the example
that she uses in her
op ed is to think
about self driving and to
say, this is a mild,
maybe somewhat humorous problem, but
think about the implications. If
you are in a life
or death situation with an
autonomous product, and you need
to communicate with it, but
it doesn't recognize your voice
as human. The consequences could
be very serious. And I
think because we are still
in the early days of
AI is fourth wave. This
is the time now to
be acknowledging the bias and
designing products that are more
thoughtful. So it really isn't
just about doing what's quote
unquote fair. We need to
design with consumer safety in
mind. What would you say
to someone who might be
listening to this podcast and
listening to this conversation and
might be thinking to themselves,
you know, this is a,
an overly progressive viewpoint. I
don't really liberal viewpoint, or
you're making computers, political and
computers. Aren't political. Is this
a political thing, or is
this about software doing what
software is supposed to do?
I, it, my opinion is
that it shouldn't be a
political thing, but it is
theirs. I think I would
say I would argue the
whole concept of diversity and
inclusion is one that has
been politicized. It is often
seen as being politically correct.
And I view it as
a business strategy because the
management research is quite clear
on the consensus that more
diverse teams not only produce
more fi stronger financial returns,
but they also build products
that serve a wider range
of users. So I would
approach it from that perspective.
And, and similarly again, when
you're talking about building data
sets that are less biased
or built with bias in
mind, you're talking about not
only serving a wider range
of users, but you're talking
about mitigating the risk, the
risk of work down the
road. So my argument is
that it's a, it's a
technical strategy and a business
strategy in tandem, but I'm
afraid that in this, especially
politically polarized climate, it has
become an issue. I am
however, heartened by the fact
that I give talks on
machine bias at pretty mainstream
tech events, like Drupal con
North America and the opensource
summit. And I've met a
wide range of people in
the sector who are not
only aware of this problem,
but do want to take
it to the next step
and solve it. So that
gives me confidence that we
will hopefully make some progress.
I appreciate that you're pointing
out that it, it doesn't
have to be politicized in
the sense of if you
want your data to be
fair, and you want your
product to work everywhere. And
you want to, presumably if
you're a capitalist make money,
you'd like to sell it
to everybody. And if you're
a product indirectly excluded someone,
then like we've, we've, we've
all seen examples of automatic
soap dispensers that can't see
different colors of skin that
would certainly block you out
of a market. So you
should probably, you say, train
your data under fairness constraints.
Maybe you could talk about
fairness constraints. Sure. So that
really starts with going back
to the tech spec for
any ML algorithm that you
are going to train. And
so when you are trying
to reduce ethical debt in
your product, you are going
to have to answer two
questions in that product specification
phase. You're going to have
to talk about which methods
of fairness you will use
and how you're going to
prioritize them. And the reason
this is important is because
building a product based on
ML isn't, if you're doing
this, it's not enough to
reactively fix bugs or pull
products from the shelves. You'll
have to answer these questions
in your tech specs, so
that you're thinking about them
from the start of the
life cycle. And this is
also the time to exclude
sensitive attributes, like race, religion
from the data set, you're
going to use to train
the algorithm. If you're going
to include them, you need
to make a specific documented
case for why that's appropriate,
not just for your users,
but also because we are
slowly but surely starting to
see more regulation on the
tech world, especially in Europe,
but we're seeing the early
stages of it in the
States as well. And so
you, I think we're going
to see more tech companies
be more accountable for their
creations in ways that they
haven't been previously. So documentation,
I know tech teams don't
always love it, but it's
really essential before you get
moving on the next steps
here, Are you looking for
an alternative maps API provider
at Tom Tom? We have
over 28 years experience in
perfecting our maps and technology.
We believe in freedom of
choice, meaning no advertising, no
subscription and no need for
a credit card on file.
Visit developer dot Tom, tom.com
to get access to 2,500
daily free API transactions and
unlimited access to our maps
and traffic flow tiles within
our maps, SDKs for Android
and iOS until September 30th, you
can get an extra 10,000
credits by going to developer
dot Tom, tom.com/promo using the
promo code Hanselman. It's exclusively
for Hanselman its listeners. That's
developer dot Tom, tom.com/promo using
promo code Hansel minutes. Can
we make this better by
allowing people to have custom
models? So you can have
a baseline model and they
custom the ability to basically
adjust something on a user
by user basis, tagging your
own data, perhaps, I guess
That's an interesting question. So
tag data is definitely a
key step. I would say,
prior to that, or in
tandem with it, you should
be training your data under
fairness constraints, like you mentioned
earlier, and this stuff is
important, but also difficult because
when you try to control
or eliminate direct or indirect
bias, you're going to find
yourself in a catch 22
related the algorithms accuracy. So
if you've trained exclusively on
Nancy nonsensitive attributes, you will
eliminate direct discrimination, but you'll
introduce or reinforced direct bias,
but you can't train separate
classifiers for each sensitive feature
because that will re-introduce direct
discrimination. So to reduce these
risks, you don't want to
just measure the average strengths
of acceptance and rejection across
sensitive groups. Instead, what you
can do is use limits
to determine what is or
isn't included in the model
you're training. And when you
do this discrimination tests are
expressed as restrictions and limitations
on the learning process, which
can ease the risk of
bias creeping in It's this
concept of ethical debt. Is
that something that you came
up with? Where did that
name come from? Because it
really is an excellent way
to express technical debt as
it relates to machine learning.
I can't take full credit
for it. I first read
that term on the new
stack, which is a great
publication by Alex Williams, that talks
about different open source topics.
And it's particularly in the
it and business intelligence space.
And one of their, the
new stacks writers wrote a
piece on ethical debt at
the start of the year.
And I thought that concept
was a perfect way to
explain what we're discussing. I
will give myself a little
bit of credit for coming
up with the correlation between
ethical debt and technical debt,
because at the end of
the day, that's really what
it is. If the algorithm
is found to be unacceptably
biased, you have to retrain
it and start all over.
And that's a misnomer that
I think a lot of
people have in the business
world. They don't often think
about the technical requirements of
technologies that are complex before
they adopt them. I spoke
at Barnard college last year
and a consultant for IBM
came up to me after
the talk, because she was
in charge of selling Watson
to people. And she said,
the number one questions she
got was, what do you
mean I have to train
it. They just thought that
they were getting this full
fledged product that was going
to solve all of their
business challenges without understanding all
of the enormous work that
they would have to do
with Watson to customize it
for their business. And so
if you don't have the
technical talent in house adopting
a product like Watson, really,
isn't going to get you
that far. And there's a
real, I think, lack of
education around AI and products
in general. And to your
point about what the role
of an analyst is, I
think that's a big aspect
of our job as well.
The thing that scares me
the most about just machine
learning and AI in generally
is that it is a
black box. It's almost, it's
a, it is a function
that someone wrote that you
can't see inside. Like you
can't see the source code
of the model. You can
only see the training data
that created the model, which
is itself, a magical black
box where something goes and
something comes out, you know,
some text goes in and
some sentiment analysis goes out
and it works in 2019,
but then maybe some new
slang comes out in 2022.
And now your sentiment analysis
thing kicks off the wrong
results because the kids are
using a new, a new
term and then you have
to go and retrain it.
And if people can't see
inside it, they're just going
to change the code around
it and not redo the
training data. People are not
going to revise their models.
Exactly. I, that's also a
great example because that really
gets to the heart of
why machine bias is such
a problem. It's it really
relates to black box algorithms.
We often don't know how
these algorithms make decisions. Even
their creators don't know how
they make decisions. And this
is really most pronounced in
a product called compass, which
is a machine learning algorithm
that has been used to
predict. Defendant's really likely hoods
of recidivism and research from
ProPublica and nonprofit journalism outlet
found that compass was making
incorrect decisions correlated with race.
So they were incorrectly predicting
that black defendants were more
likely to recommit crimes. And
they were incorrectly predicting that
white defendants were more likely
to recommit crimes, but both
ex both predictions were wrong.
And this isn't a hypothetical
product judges in over a
dozen us States have used
campuses outputs to impact the
sentences of defendants, whether they
were released on parole or
whether they got longer sentences.
And when one person impacted
by campus's results tries to
take his case to the
Supreme court. The judge has
actually refused to hear it.
And that to me, sets
a really dangerous legal precedent
because it signals that more
than half of Supreme court
justices were willing to trust
how the compass algorithm was
making decisions, even when those
decisions were wrong. And so
that really sets again a
problematic legal precedent for how
AI will be regulated or
not. The good news is
that if you have someone
to monitor your data sets
throughout the product life cycle,
this can be mitigated. So
the developers often build training
sets based on data. They
hope their models will encounter
in deployment, but many of
them don't monitor the data
that they will receive in
deployment and ML products are
unique in the sense that
they're constantly taking in new
data and refining the results
based on that data. But
the problem as mentioned is
that when they encounter different
data, that could have a
negative impact. And so it's
also not uncommon for algorithms
to update without the model
itself being revalidated. And so
if you have someone on
your team, who's monitoring the
source history and context of
the data in your algorithm,
not just in production, but
also in deployment, they can
conduct continuous audits and find
unacceptable behavior. Yeah. It also
seems like if, if people
are, some people are using
or they're refining their algorithms
and they're refining their model,
other people, other people aren't,
but the idea that the
average Joe or Jane doesn't
understand it much less understand
code. I think we've all
read and heard when machine,
when lawyers and judges try
to understand like even basic
code, like I've, I've been
involved in lawsuits where there's
an analysis of an algorithm
and the quote unquote algorithm
is like a couple of
four loops, right? It's not
rocket surgery. If you then
introduce machine learning and artificial
intelligence to it, they have
no idea what's going on.
How can they possibly litigate
or understand that and, and
do the right thing. It's
really just rolling the dice.
Right? And I think that
the key there is not
so much that everyone should
be so skilled on machine
learning that they can read
and interpret code. It's more
about having the general awareness
that algorithms are not unbiased,
and that is important for
the devs and product teams
to know who are building
these creations, but it's important
for everyone to know it.
I would argue it's very
important for Supreme court justices
to not blindly trust algorithms
that are being used to
make incorrect projections about whether
a person is more likely
or less likely to recommit
a crime, they should instead
be asking, how did you
make that decision and holding
the creators accountable for those
decisions? And so it's not
about, again, understanding the code
at a really deep level.
It's about understanding that algorithms
have their own biases, just
like people, especially as we're
in this stage where we
are trying to get closer
to general AI, where it
does more closely mimic the
thought processes and decisions of
humans. That means if you're
taking that to its logical
conclusion that the AI could
potentially get even more biased.
And so then it becomes
even more important to introduce
measures from the start to
mitigate it. Okay. So if
we explain that to nontechnical
parent or partner, and they
start to understand that algorithms
exist and that the algorithms
sometimes are generated, sometimes are
written, sometimes have bias. How
do we, and should we
separate the humans that wrote
it from the algorithm? Like,
for example, if we use
Facebook, like, is there an
evil mustache, twirling programmer who
made a biased algorithm and
should nontechnical parent think that,
or is it that humans
are complicated and messy meat
bags? And we sometimes screw
up like, how much should
we consider malice in the
terms of bias and AI
versus incompetence? Definitely the latter.
It's definitely not a wizard
of Oz scenario where there's
one person behind the curtain
pulling puppet strings. It really
is very easy for bias
to, into an algorithm for
many of the reasons mentioned.
And oftentimes again, the creators
of these algorithms can't see
how they made decisions. The
other thing that you have
to consider is that the
more fair an algorithm becomes,
the more of an increase
in risk. You have that
an algorithm won't be accurate.
And so it's a delicate
trade off in fairness versus
accuracy. That again, you have
to define at the outset.
So it's not an either,
I don't want to frame
this as an either or
scenario because you can have
an algorithm that is both
unbiased and accurate, but you
do have to account for
that as well, because those
are, again, there are so
many factors that going into
the algorithm because they're built
on endless neurons. And so
you have to just be
thinking about these things from
the start once before you
go in and start training
the models. So if the,
if the listener is now
sufficiently overwhelmed and probably thinking,
well, I should just not
touch this at all. I
shouldn't even introduce AI and
ML into my product. What
would you tell them? I
would tell them that in
many ways it has never
been easier to be working
on algorithms that are unbiased,
because we are fortunate in
that 2018 in particular saw
the release of many different
open source data sets that
you can use to train
your algorithms. And that has
historically been a big barrier
is not only the volume
of data, but how specific
it is. You mentioned tagging
earlier. And that's a very
important aspect of building algorithms
that are fair tagging, refers
to classes that are present
in an image and their
locations. And this sounds simple
until you realize how much
work it would take to
dress shapes around every single
person in a photo of
a crowd, or you would
draw a box around every
single person on a highway.
Even if you succeeded, you
might rush the tagging and
you might draw your shape
slop, really. And that would
lead to a neural network
that's poorly trained, but there
are to that point where
a product's coming to market.
One example is a data
annotation project called brain builder.
And they use open source
frameworks like TensorFlow to help
users manage and annotate the
training data. It also aims
to bring diverse class examples
to data sets so that
you can teach algorithms positive
examples of something and negative
examples of something. So I
would encourage people who are
interested in building algorithms that
are less biased to seek
out date training sets that
they can use on places
like GitHub brain builder is
a product that is worth
looking into. There are more
options than ever to build
unbiased algorithms. And so I
would encourage them to go
the open source route. And
that really goes back to
the crucial role that transparency
plays in building these algorithms.
Fantastic. Well, I appreciate You
chatting with me today, Laura
McPhail all about bias in
AI, and I'll be sure
to include links to Lauren's
articles on the next web
and on opensource.com. And thanks
for the work that you're
doing, helping to put all
of this into content. Thanks
so much for having me.
I had a great time
talking to you. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes, and we'll see you
again next week.